# Project: Data Warehouse on Amazon Web Services



### Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I was tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. 



### Project Description

In this project, I applied what I have learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. 

Goals for the projects are to:

1. load data from **S3** to staging tables on **Redshift**

2. execute SQL statements that create the **analytics tables** from these staging tables

   

## Database schema design

Database schema that was utilized in this project is one of the simplest data mart schemas named **Star Schema** which consist in our case of one **fact table** - **factsongplays* and several **dimension tables - dimartists, dimusers, dimsongs and dimtime** 



## ETL pipeline

ETL pipeline was designed with a main focus on getting the insights into understanding what songs users are listening to.

The whole ETL pipeline reads the json data from `song_data` and `log_data` files located in S3 buckets into the staging tables located in Redshift, there we programmatically processes it and inserts them into the 5 analytical tables (4 dimensional and 1 fact table - star schema) in Redshift using Python and SQL. Tables where the data is inserted in the database are `factsongplay`, `dimusers`, `dimartists`, `dimsongs` and `dimtime`.



## Example queries:

You can find two example queries what an analytical teams can now perform easily utilizing the existing schema in the Jupyter Notebook testqueries.ipynb.



### Project Template

The project template includes four files:

- `create_table.py` is where fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift are designed.

- `etl.py` is where one loads data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into analytics tables on Redshift.

- `sql_queries.py` is where SQL statements are defined, which will be imported into the two other files above.

- `README.md` is where the discussion on your process and decisions for this ETL pipeline is made.

  

### Project Datasets

Two datasets reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

- Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
- Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

Log data json path: `s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json`



### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```txt
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```



### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```txt
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```